docs: add a Customize your template series under Get started (#26712)
coder/coder: docs/tutorials/quickstart/add-a-language.md

# Add a programming language to your template

> This guide is for a developer who finished [Launch your first workspace](./launch-workspace.md)

Author: "a developer" or "developers"?

Author: From Coder Agents: I switched the intro to direct address ("Now that you've finished Launch your first workspace, you can ...") in 39b5f58e76. That follows the style guide's "address the reader directly" rule, matches Launch your first workspace, and sidesteps the singular/plural question. Applied the same opening to the other three guides.

and wants their workspace to ship with another language toolchain ready to use.

The Quickstart template installs a language only when the workspace owner selects it from the **Programming Languages** parameter.

> In this guide you add Ruby as an option,

Author: ```suggestion
In this guide, you add Ruby as an option,
```

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in dd5d3ab6ad. Added the comma after the introductory phrase.

> If it is not, refer to [Customize workspace startup](./customize-workspace-startup.md#open-the-template-for-editing).

## What you'll do

- ✅ Add a Ruby option to the **Programming Languages** parameter.
- ✅ Learn why the option alone does not install Ruby.
- ✅ Install the Ruby toolchain when a workspace starts.

## Parameters in brief

A parameter is a question Coder asks when someone creates a workspace.
Each parameter comes from a `coder_parameter` [data source](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/data-sources) in the template.
A data source reads input;
it does not build infrastructure on its own.

The **Programming Languages** parameter is a multi-select list,
and each language the reader can choose is an `option` block:

```tf
data "coder_parameter" "languages" {
  name      = "languages"
  type      = "list(string)"
  form_type = "multi-select"

  option {
    name  = "Python"
    value = "python"
    icon  = "/icon/python.svg"
  }
  # ...more options
}
```

The parameter controls the form.
It does not install anything.
A separate startup script reads the selected values and installs each toolchain.

> Keep that split in mind,

Author: Isn't "keep in mind" an idiom?

Author: From Coder Agents: Yes, our own accessibility rule flags idioms. Replaced "Keep that split in mind, because the next steps depend on it" with "That split matters, because the rest of this guide builds on it" in 39b5f58e76.

because the next steps depend on it.

## Step 1: Add the Ruby option

Open `main.tf` and find the `data "coder_parameter" "languages"` block.
Add a Ruby `option` alongside the existing options:

```tf
  option {
    name  = "Ruby"
    value = "ruby"
    icon  = "/icon/ruby.svg"
  }
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The `option` block must sit at the same indentation as the other `option` blocks inside the parameter.
> Coder reads the parameter's choices from these blocks,
> so a misplaced `option` does not appear in the form.

Push a new version of the template:

> ```console

Author: Should this not be `sh` here?

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in dd5d3ab6ad. Switched this and the other bare-command fences to `sh`. Per the Style Guide code-fence rule, `console` is now reserved for sessions that show a typed command with its output behind a `$` prompt.

## Step 3: Install Ruby when the workspace starts

The template installs each selected language from `install-languages.sh.tftpl`,
a startup script that runs when the workspace boots.
Open that file and add a branch that installs Ruby when the reader selects it:

```sh
if echo "$LANGUAGES" | grep -q "ruby"; then
  if command -v ruby >/dev/null 2>&1; then
    echo "Ruby: $(ruby --version | head -1)"
  else
    echo "Installing Ruby toolchain..."
    apt_update
    sudo apt-get install -y -qq ruby-full
    echo "Installed Ruby: $(ruby --version | head -1)"
  fi
fi
```

The script installs Ruby with `apt-get`,
the package manager built into the workspace image.

> [!WARNING]
> Reach for the package manager the workspace image provides,
> not a personal one.
> If you replace the `apt-get` line with `brew install ruby`,
> the build fails:
> the `codercom/enterprise-base:ubuntu` image does not include Homebrew,
> so the workspace logs `brew: command not found` and Ruby never installs.
> The image ships `apt-get`,
> so install system packages with it,
> as the rest of this script does.
> Use `apt-get install -y ruby-full` instead.

Push the template again:

> ```console

Author: Same nit

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in dd5d3ab6ad. Converted to `sh`.

coder templates push -d ~/coder-quickstart -y quickstart
```

Create a fresh workspace with Ruby selected,
open a terminal,
and check the version again:

> ```console

Author: Same nit

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in dd5d3ab6ad. Converted to `sh`.

ruby --version
```

This time the workspace reports a Ruby version.

## What just happened

You changed two different things to add one language:

- The `coder_parameter` `option` block added Ruby to the workspace creation form.
- The startup script installed the Ruby toolchain when a workspace owner selected Ruby.

A parameter collects a choice.
A startup script acts on it.
A new language needs both.

## Learn more

- [Parameters](../../admin/templates/extending-templates/parameters.md) in the Coder documentation
- [Terraform data sources](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/data-sources)
- [Terraform types](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/types) for parameter values

> - Next in the series: [Install your own command-line tools](./install-tools-with-mise.md)

Author: I would maybe have a separate "What's next?" section above "Learn more" that points to "Install your own command line tools." Also, rather than have the page slug specifically call out `mise`, can we make it more general? That page is supposed to handle both Homebrew and Mise.

```suggestion
## What's next?

Now that you modified parameters, you can [install your own command-line tools](./install-tools-with-mise.md)

## Learn more

- [Parameters](../../admin/templates/extending-templates/parameters.md) in the Coder documentation
- [Terraform data sources](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/data-sources)
- [Terraform types](https://developer.hashicorp.com/terraform/language/expressions/types) for parameter values
```

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in 39b5f58e76. Added a "What's next?" section above "Learn more" that points to Install your own command-line tools, and renamed the page to a general slug (install-command-line-tools.md) since it now covers both Homebrew and mise. Trimmed the Learn more list as you suggested.

  order        = 1

  option {
    name  = "Python"
    value = "python"
    icon  = "/icon/python.svg"
  }
  # ...more options
}
```

Adding an `option` adds a choice to that list.

## Step 1: Add the Ruby option

In `main.tf`, find the `data "coder_parameter" "languages"` block (it starts at
line 31).
The last option, **C/C++**, ends at line 71,
and the parameter's closing brace is line 72.
Add a Ruby `option` between lines 71 and 72,
after the last option and before the closing brace:

```tf
  option {
    name  = "Ruby"
    value = "ruby"
    icon  = "/icon/ruby.svg"
  }
```

> [!IMPORTANT]
> The `option` block must sit at the same indentation as the other `option`
> blocks inside the parameter.
> Coder reads the parameter's choices from these blocks,
> so a misplaced `option` doesn't appear in the form.

Now publish the change as a new template version:

<div class="tabs">

### UI

In the web editor, make the edit above in `main.tf`.
Select **Build**, wait for the build to pass, then select **Publish**.

### CLI

Make the edit in `~/coder-quickstart/main.tf`,
then publish a new version:

```sh
coder templates push -d ~/coder-quickstart -y quickstart
```

</div>

<details>

> <summary>Final code: the complete <code>main.tf</code></summary>

Author: This needs to move to the end of the doc, at or around the "What just happened" section.

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in 3f4b4d170c. Moved the complete `main.tf` out of Step 1 to the new `## Final code` section near What just happened, so Step 1 now reads as an instruction to add the Ruby option rather than a full-file dump. Both complete files live together in the collapsed tabs at the end.

> If you replace the `apt-get` line with `brew install ruby`, the build fails:
> the `codercom/enterprise-base:ubuntu` image doesn't include Homebrew,
> so the workspace logs `brew: command not found` and Ruby never installs.
> To install a personal tool like a Homebrew formula in your own workspace,
> refer to [Install your own command-line tools](./install-command-line-tools.md).

Publish the change, then update your workspace again:

<div class="tabs">

### UI

1. In the web editor, make the edit above in `install-languages.sh.tftpl`.
2. Select **Build**, wait for the build to pass, then select **Publish**.
3. On your workspace's home tab, select **Update and restart**.

### CLI

Make the edit in `~/coder-quickstart/install-languages.sh.tftpl`,
then publish and update:

```sh
coder templates push -d ~/coder-quickstart -y quickstart
coder update <your-workspace>
```

</div>

Ruby is already selected, so you don't change parameters this time.
When the workspace restarts, open a terminal and check again:

```sh
ruby --version
```

This time the workspace reports a Ruby version.

<details>
<summary>Final code: the complete <code>install-languages.sh.tftpl</code></summary>

> The entire `install-languages.sh.tftpl` after adding the Ruby branch:

Author: We should have this for both the `main.tf` file and the `install-languages.sh.tftpl` file, and this should be a common fixture across all pages that modify the template code. To keep the length of the overall page small, you can have tabs show the different files on toggle.

Author: From Coder Agents: Done in 3f4b4d170c. The Final code block now shows both `main.tf` and `install-languages.sh.tftpl` in toggle tabs inside one collapsed `<details>`, and I made it a common fixture: every template-editing guide (add-a-language, install-command-line-tools, personalize-with-dotfiles, authenticate-to-github) now ends with a `## Final code` section showing the complete file(s) for that guide. Each fixture is scoped to its own guide (base template + that page's edit), not cumulative across the series.

One tradeoff to flag: with no include/partial mechanism in the docs, these are in-page copies of the full `main.tf`, so they can drift from `examples/templates/quickstart/main.tf`. I generated each copy from that canonical template and verified it byte-for-byte, but keeping four copies in sync is manual. Happy to centralize or generate them in a follow-up (for example a small check that rebuilds them from the template) if you'd like to cut the upkeep.
